project-2

Module-1:

creation of VPC:
1.1 name for the vpc:3-tier-archt
1.2 Az's=2(To ensure high availability. If one Availability Zone fails, the application continues running in the other)
1.3 public subnet=2,private subnet=2(2 Public Subnets One public subnet is created in each Availability Zone to host internet-facing resources like a Load Balancer or Bastion Host. 2 Private Subnets One private subnet is created in each Availability Zone to host secure resources like application servers and databases)
1.4 NAT gateway=1 per zone(1 NAT Gateway per Zone Private instances need internet access for updates, but should not be accessible from the internet. One NAT Gateway per AZ also avoids a single point of failure)
1.5 VPC end point none(No VPC Endpoints VPC Endpoints are only needed when you want private access to AWS services like S3 or DynamoDB. This project doesn't require them)
1.6 launch VPC
1.7 check VPC
If we choose other options, what happened?
1 Availability Zone? → If that AZ goes down, your application stops.
Only Public Subnets? → Databases become exposed to the internet, which is not secure.
Only Private Subnets? → Users cannot access your application from the internet.
1 NAT Gateway for the whole VPC? → Cheaper, but if it fails, private instances in all AZs lose internet access.
 Enable IPv6? → Not needed for most beginner projects and adds unnecessary complexity

Module-2:

creation of auto scaling groups:                                                                

Launch Template-Stores the instance configuration so the Auto Scaling Group can launch identical instances automatically.
Template Name & Description-Helps identify and manage the template easily later.                  
Ubuntu AMI- Ubuntu is free, widely used, lightweight, and beginner-friendly.                                          
t3.micro- Eligible for AWS Free Tier and sufficient for basic testing.                                              
Create New Key Pair- Provides secure SSH access to instances.                                                                  
Create New Security Group-Allows defining custom network access rules for the application.                                          
Security Group Name & Description-Makes the security group's purpose easy to recognize.                                                    
Select Existing VPC-Ensures instances are launched within the correct network environment.                                    
Edit Inbound Rules-Controls which traffic is allowed to reach the instances.                                                
Custom TCP Port 8000 from Anywhere Allows users to access the application running on port 8000.                                              
SSH from Anywhere-Allows administrators to remotely connect to the instance for management.                                
Create Launch Template-Saves all configurations for future instance launches.                                                    
Refresh Auto Scaling Group Page-Loads the newly created launch template so it can be selected.                                            
Why not choose other options?
Other AMIs → May cost more, use more resources, or not match your application requirements.
Larger instance types → Higher cost and unnecessary for basic practice/testing.
Existing key pair → Use only if you already have and manage one securely.
Existing security group→ Might contain rules that don't fit your application.
Different ports → Only needed if your application listens on those ports.
Restricting SSH/IPs → More secure for production, but "Anywhere" is often used in labs for simplicity.

module-3:

Create Auto Scaling Group:

To automatically create, remove, and manage EC2 instances based on demand.
Reason: Keeps your application available even if an instance fails.
Name:
To identify your Auto Scaling Group.
Reason: Makes it easy to manage multiple ASGs.
Select Created Launch Template:
A Launch Template contains the EC2 configuration (AMI, instance type, key pair, security group, etc.).
Reason: Every new EC2 instance will use the same settings.
Select VPC:
To decide which network the EC2 instances will be launched in.
Reason: Ensures instances are created in the correct private network.
Select Availability Zones (Private 1 & Private 2):
To launch instances in multiple Availability Zones.
Reason: If one Availability Zone fails, the other continues running, improving high availability.
Next:
Moves to the next configuration page.
No Load Balancer:
No load balancer is attached.
Reason: Used when you're only practicing Auto Scaling or don't need to distribute traffic.
Next:
Continues to the next step.
Desired Capacity = 2:
Starts with 2 EC2 instances.
Reason: Your application begins with two running servers.
Min Capacity = 1:
Keeps at least 1 EC2 instance running.
Reason: Prevents the application from going completely offline.
Max Capacity = 4:
Allows up to 4 EC2 instances.
Reason: Handles increased traffic by adding more servers when needed.
Scaling Policy = None:
No automatic scaling rules are configured.
Reason: The number of instances won't change automatically unless you update it manually.
Add Notification = No:
No email or SNS notifications are sent.
Reason: Notifications are optional and not needed for basic practice.
Create Auto Scaling Group:
Saves all the settings and creates the ASG.
Reason: AWS starts managing the EC2 instances automatically.
Check the Status:
Verify that 2 EC2 instances are created in the selected private subnets.
Reason: Confirms that the Auto Scaling Group is working correctly.

module-4:

Creating Bastion host:

Search for EC2 Instance:
To create a new EC2 instance.
Reason: This instance will be used as the Bastion Host.
Create Similar to EC2 Instance Creation:
Follow the normal EC2 creation process.
Reason: A Bastion Host is also an EC2 instance.
Name, Ubuntu, t3.micro, Key Pair:
Name: Identifies the Bastion Host.
Ubuntu: Easy to use and supports SSH.
t3.micro: Free Tier eligible and sufficient for a Bastion Host.
Key Pair: Required to securely log in using SSH.
Create Security Group:
Controls incoming and outgoing traffic.
Reason: Acts like a firewall for the Bastion Host.
Allow SSH Traffic from Anywhere:
Allows SSH (Port 22) access.
Reason: Lets you connect from your laptop to the Bastion Host.
Edit Network Settings:
Configure networking for the instance.
Reason: Place the Bastion Host in the correct VPC and subnet.
Select Your VPC:
Choose the VPC you created.
Reason: The Bastion Host and private EC2 instances must be in the same VPC to communicate.
Select Public-1 Subnet Only:
Launch the Bastion Host in a public subnet:
Reason: Only public subnets can provide internet access.
Assign Auto Public IP:
Gives the Bastion Host a public IP address.
Reason: Without a public IP, you cannot connect to it from your laptop.
Launch Instance:
Creates the Bastion Host.
Reason: After launching, you can SSH into it and then access the private EC2 instances.

Module-5:

Open mobaXterm:

Open MobaXterm
To connect to Linux EC2 instances using SSH:
Reason: MobaXterm is an SSH client that provides a terminal and file transfer (SFTP).
Click on New Session:
To create a new SSH connection.
Reason: Every remote server requires a separate session.
 Select SSH:
SSH (Secure Shell) is the protocol used.
Reason: It securely connects your computer to the EC2 instance.
Enter Bastion Host Public IP:
Paste the Bastion Host's public IP.
Reason: Your laptop can access only the Bastion Host because it has a public IP.
Username = ubuntu:
Ubuntu EC2 instances use ubuntu as the default username.
Reason: AWS creates this user automatically.
Select Key Pair (.pem):
Choose the private key you created.
Reason: The key pair authenticates you securely without a password.
 SFTP Panel:
Shows the remote server's files.
Reason: Makes it easy to upload or download files.
 Drag the .pem File to SFTP:
Upload the key to the Bastion Host.
Reason: The Bastion Host needs the key to connect to the private EC2 instance.
Run Commands:
Configure the key and connect to the private instance.
Reason: Linux commands prepare secure access.
 chmod 400 your_key.pem:
Changes the permissions of the key file.
Reason: SSH only accepts private keys that are readable only by the owner. Otherwise, SSH rejects the key.
 ssh -i project_final key.pem ubuntu@<private-ip>:
Connects from the Bastion Host to the private EC2 instance.
Reason: Private instances cannot be accessed directly from the internet.
 Login Successful:
You are now inside the private EC2 instance.
Reason: You can install software and manage the server securely.

Module 6 :

 Creating Files:

vim index.html:
Opens or creates an HTML file.
Reason: vim is a Linux text editor.
Press i:
Enters Insert Mode.
Reason: Allows you to type and edit the file.
Write HTML Cod
Add content like <h1> and <p>.
Reason: This creates a simple web page
Press Esc:
Exits Insert Mode.
Reason: Lets you enter commands in Vim.
Type :wq:
w = Save (write), q = Quit.
Reason: Saves the file and closes Vim.
cat index.html:
Displays the contents of the file.
Reason: Confirms that your HTML file was saved correctly.

Module 7 :

Application Load Balancer (ALB)

Open AWS Load Balancer:
Open the EC2 Dashboard.
Navigate to Load Balancers under Load Balancing.
Reason: The Load Balancer distributes incoming traffic across multiple EC2 instances, improving availability and performance.
Create a Target Group (Before Creating the Load Balancer):
Click Target Groups.
Reason: A Target Group tells the Load Balancer which EC2 instances should receive incoming requests.
Click Create Target Group:
Reason: Creates a logical group of backend EC2 instances.
Choose Target Type: Instances
Reason: Traffic will be routed directly to EC2 instances.
Set Protocol: HTTP
Reason: The web application communicates over the HTTP protocol.
Set Port: 8000:
Reason: The application running on the EC2 instances listens on Port 8000.
Select Your VPC:
Reason: The Target Group must belong to the same VPC as the EC2 instances.
Enter Target Group Name
Reason: A meaningful name helps identify the Target Group easily.

Click Next

Reason: Proceed to register backend EC2 instances.
Register Targets:

Select the two public EC2 instances:
Do NOT select the Bastion Host.
Reason: Only the application servers should receive user traffic. The Bastion Host is used only for SSH access.
Click Include as Pending Below
Reason: Registers the selected EC2 instances with the Target Group.
Click Create Target Group
Reason: Completes the Target Group configuration.
Create the Application Load Balancer
Go back to Load Balancers.
Click Create Load Balancer.
Choose Application Load Balancer.
Reason: An Application Load Balancer distributes HTTP/HTTPS traffic across multiple backend servers.
Enter Load Balancer Name:
Reason: Makes it easier to identify the Load Balancer.
Scheme: Internet-facing
Reason: Allows users on the internet to access the application.
IP Address Type: IPv4
Reason: Provides IPv4 connectivity for client requests.
Select the VPC:
Choose the same VPC used by the EC2 instances.
Reason: The Load Balancer and Target Group must be in the same VPC.
Select Availability Zones:
Choose two Availability Zones.
Select Public Subnets:
Reason: Using multiple Availability Zones improves high availability and fault tolerance.
Select the Security Group:
Choose the previously created Load Balancer Security Group.
Reason: The Security Group controls inbound and outbound traffic to the Load Balancer.
Configure Listener
Protocol: HTTP
Port: 80
Forward requests to the created Target Group.
Reason: The Listener receives client requests and forwards them to the Target Group.
Review Configuration
Verify all settings.
Click Create Load Balancer:
Reason: Creates the Application Load Balancer.
Verify the Load Balancer
